.\" Copyright (c) 2010-2014, MIT Probabilistic Computing Project
.\"
.\" Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
.\" you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
.\" You may obtain a copy of the License at
.\"
.\"     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
.\"
.\" Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
.\" distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
.\" WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
.\" See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
.\" limitations under the License.
.\"
.Dd June 11, 2015
.Dt BAYESLITE 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bayeslite
.Nd interactive BQL shell
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl bdmq
.Op Fl f Ar pathname
.Op Fl j Ar n
.Op Fl s Ar seed
.Op Ar bayesdb
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is an interactive shell for Bayeslite, a probabilistic database built
on SQLite 3.
.Pp
.Nm
either works on a transient in-memory database, if the
.Fl m Ns / Ns Fl Fl memory
option is provided, or on a database stored in the file
.Ar bayesdb .
Either the
.Fl m Ns / Ns Fl Fl memory
option or a database must be provided, to avoid the mistake of doing
useful analysis in an unintentionally transient database.
.Pp
Before printing a prompt and executing queries and commands entered by the user,
.Nm
will execute queries and commands in the file
.Pa ~/.bayesliterc .
This behaviour can be suppressed with the
.Fl q Ns / Ns Fl Fl no\-init\-file
option.
.Pp
The following options are supported:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl b , Fl Fl batch
Batch mode: exit after processing files specified with the
.Fl f Ns / Ns Fl Fl file
options.
.It Fl d , Fl Fl debug
Debug mode: enable internal debugging features, mainly for automatic tests.
.It Fl f Ar pathname , Fl Fl file Ns = Ns Ar pathname
Execute the BQL and shell commands in the file at
.Ar pathname
as if the user had typed them in, but without printing prompts or results.
.It Fl m , Fl Fl memory
Store data in a transient database in memory, rather than in a file on disk.
.It Fl j Ar n , Fl Fl jobs Ns = Ns Ar n
Use
.Ar n
parallel jobs for model initialization and analysis.
.It Fl q , Fl Fl no\-init\-file
Suppress loading of
.Pa ~/.bayesliterc
on startup.
.It Fl s Ar s , Fl Fl seed Ns = Ns Ar s
Use
.Ar s
as the initial seed for random choices.
.El
.Sh INPUT COMMANDS
Input at the
.Sq Sy "bayeslite> "
prompt is normally interpreted as a BQL query, which must be
terminated by a semicolon before
.Nm
will execute it and print its results.
Input that begins with a
.Sq \&.
is interpreted as a shell command, performing operations outside BQL.
.Pp
The following commands are supported, in addition to any that may be
loaded with the
.Sy ".hook"
command:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Sy ".codebook" Ar table Ar pathname
Import a codebook for
.Ar table
from the file
.Ar pathname ,
which must contain a CSV table having columns
.Sq name ,
.Sq shortname ,
.Sq description ,
and
.Sq value_map .
.It Sy ".csv" Ar table Ar pathname
Create a table named
.Ar table
from the CSV data in the file at
.Ar pathname .
.It Sy ".describe" Ar type Ar name ...
Describe the objects named
.Ar name ...
of type
.Ar type ,
which may be one of:
.Bl -tag -compact -offset abcd
.It Sy table Ns Pq Sy s
.It Sy generator Ns Pq Sy s
.It Sy columns
.It Sy model Ns Pq Sy s
.El
For
.Sy columns
and
.Sy model Ns Pq Sy s ,
.Ar name
refers to a generator or to a table with a default generator, whose
columns and models will be shown.
.It Sy ".guess" Ar generator Ar table
Create a generator named
.Ar generator
for the table
.Ar table ,
guessing the statistical types of the columns in
.Ar table .
.It Sy ".help"
Show brief help for all commands.
.It Sy ".help" Ar cmd ...
Show detailed help for the named commands.
.It Sy ".hook" Ar pathname
Load the Python source file at
.Ar pathname
to install new commands into the shell.
.It Sy ".python" Ar expression
Evaluate the Python expression
.Ar expression
and print the result.
.It Sy ".read" Ar pathname
Execute BQL and shell commands in the file at
.Ar pathname .
.It Sy ".sql" Ar query
Execute the SQL query
.Ar query
and print the resulting table, if any.
.It Sy ".trace" Op Sy "bql" Ns | Ns Sy "sql"
Enable tracing of BQL or SQL queries: any BQL or SQL query executed
will be printed first.
.It Sy ".untrace" Op Sy "bql" Ns | Ns Sy "sql"
Disable tracing of BQL or SQL queries.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Pa ~/.bayesliterc
Initialization file, executed on startup.
.El
.Sh BUGS
There is no way to save a transient database to disk.
.Pp
The
.Sy ".python"
command allows only Python expressions, not Python statements like the
normal Python REPL additionally supports.
